
### Outcomes and action items

- [ ] Use the OceanGliders vertical velocities repo as the central point for all notes and code https://github.com/OceanGlidersCommunity/Vertical_Velocities_SOP
- [ ] All contributors to add themselves as authors on the repo. See example from Bastien https://github.com/OceanGlidersCommunity/Vertical_Velocities_SOP/pull/4
- [ ] Callum to arrange github training session for all who want to attend
- [ ] Share datasets in OG1 format with minimum required variables - Bastien to provide list of parameters
- [ ] Share datasets as cleaned timeseries (e.g. fixed for themal lag issues)
- [ ] Share one good quality long datasets per region of interest where we expect to see vertical velocities
- [ ] Make code for flight models available
- [ ] Callum to host datasets at VOTO and make them easily available
# Partial transcript of meeting

### Felix gives overview
started from annunziata's presentation on plumes 1.5 years ago. Can we see plumes/cones?

want to get a paper going comparing different regions of the world

first step to be able to share data is a common format and an agreement of what to do

formed the vertical velocities SOP. Not sure it will become an SOP

many components: flightmodels, measuring w with adcps

To move toward an SOP, need names of vaiables, agree what to share and when

easy for someone who has time to look at data and compare it cross platform and cross region

don't want one person to have to do all the processing

agree to share timeseries of vertical velocities calculated from flight models, as well as T/S. Also share raw data

have published flight models for seaglider and slocum

have data in adriatic, north atlantic, southern ocean, some close to ice

in terms of getting community started, we have an email group. Best place to share info is on the SOP on ocean gliders. Victor and Felix are only participants just now

There are some suggestions for variables names as well as the email discussions

### Open discussion

Pierre: Encourage people to join the github organisation

OG1 format, can you recalculate flight model, recommend you supply it in OG1 format with w, everyone shares this format

need named variables for vertical velocites,

Pitch, roll etc. are not currently mandatory in OG1, but they are in the vocab

Seb: Should we just look at w, not framed around specific features/process

Seb: We have looked at w from gliders around maud rise in southern ocean. Not convective, but potential signals from flow/topo interaction. Cones/plumes are narrow and quick, could be good focus but potentially excludes others who don't have these features

Felix: Flight models. Need to make sure same model/same flight platform

Eleanor: or the flight model can be recalculated from the datasets, not vehicle specific
For this need volume, mass in the data format to be able to recalculate this

Bastien: has flight models available in Python

Lukas: Fix one param (lift or drag) and search for the other. Have to do this.  

Eleanor: can use pitch to solve for both of these

Lukas: Or you can use velocities from e.g ADCP

Lukas: IF you have waves in north sea, get a strong w signal near the seabed. Turns out the glider gets advected and moves like a water particle in a circle, pressure change compensated by waves normally, but if waves are similar to water depths the orbitals squash to now get a discrepancy that shows in the pressure signal and the flight model shows vertical velocities

Lukas: Do waves make extra flow?

Ilker: If you start from scratch, there are still many paths to w. Taking in chunks etc. What path do we take

Eleanor: evaluate uncertainty in w depending on the choices taken

Ilker: If we provide w in OG1 format that is a lot of work

Eleanor: one mission each with clean data and a range of pitches where available. Longer mission is better

Felix: Theoretically once you process one mission the rest are easy. But start with a nice one

Eleanor: Need a volunteer

Felix: Need ton contribute to git and converge on a common format. Taking it forward need more. Who will have the time

Ilker: recommendation of how to do it, process in chunks? One week per chunk?

Felix: Need to bring the codes together, something to work

Ilker: If the data is the same format, then platform does not matter. We can then compare different routines...

Felix: Do we focus on parts of the mission where we have e.g. stable flight

Eleanor: better to share the whole mission, then when you re-run the model and can see how it affects it. Hard to converge the flight model over a short time series. But time varying drag...

Bastien: Biofouling is strong effect. Flight model does not converge to same variables at the begining and end. Tends to be a smooth change in parameters

Bastien: moving forward with processing, common code and common data are valuable. Missing human power. We have e..g masters projects but we need to break this into chunks. Agree on format, models and what stats we will extract to evaluate perfomance. Then pass this to students

Felix: WE have a database of published papers to compare to

Bastien: Start with 3 or 4 datasets where we know we have signals. Preferably with ADCP or varying pitch for checks. Now what stats do we want. e.g. RMS of w

Seb: PhD student starting in fall looking at mixing in southern ocean, maybe they could be put on this

Eleanor: If a PhD need to ring fence the idea for them with a clear objective

Felix: We want a deadline of code and data shared by the end of the year

Lukas: What flight models are around? Theoretical ones, not implementations. Minimal differences between Lukas or Eleanor. Bastien has this coded, can use either flight model

Bastien: Need OG1 format as it has the GPS. Want a model that converges safely, or lots of repititions (of transects) or ADCP

Eleanor: Only seaglider does variable pitch dives at the start of the mission. Not slocum/seaexplorer

Lukas: Looking at angle of attack/induced drag by varying the pitch. Can still get to w without this though.

Eleanor: A metric of how well constrained the flight model is, this could be a good metric


Eleanor: Nice to look at: Convection, waves over topo, internal waves

Seb: Postdoc with Alberto at NOC looking at waves over topo. Some gliders unusable due to bad flight.

Eleanor: If there is an SOP one day, don't do control checks so frequently, messes with the flight model

Ilker: Lofoten is a nice feature with vertical velocity patterns. Could be a hotspot. Strong isopycnal displacement

Rob: Gliders with internal tidal signals, but magnitues are small. Prefer solitary wave field if possible, bigger signal. Run a glider need a generator of these... Or steep topo interaction.

Anthony: maybe saw paper vertical velocities from tides?

Anthony: River plumes could be a good source? Rhone river plume

Eleanor: Glider flight real messy in these places though. Probs bad flight model

Felix: for plumes 2.5 cm/s to be visible above the noise

Eleanor: Error of 0.5 cm/s is error in w

Lukas: time series of vertical velocities

Bastien: Uncertainty in all things, temp, sal, ballast position etc.There is always error. This propogates to w estimates. This places a real limit on what we can detect

Lukas: In north sea have a signal but we're sure it's wrong. FLight model assumes instant adaptation of speed, but e.g. pumps are not instantaneous, air issues etc. Good to list all these issues

Karen: Do we have upward looking ADCP data? Strengthens paper a lot

Felix: In gulf of Lyons we have strong upward velocity and glider over the top. See strong agreement

Ilker: Faroe Channel, two arrays of moorings. Can you get w though?

Pierre: Vertical velocity detection maybe 2 cm/s from ADCPs

Anthony: colleagues looking specifically at 5 beam ADCP, get 20 m range of the sentinal/signature on dedicated upward looking beam. They look at biological response. There's a JOP paper. Struggle to get narrower than 0.5 cm/s variance

Felix: Should share references on the SOPs

Ilker: Ground truthing estimates is good, but not step one. First we assume we can trust flight models. Verify later

Eleanor: Can put data in the OG1 format. Have masters students. Nothing more than that yet

Action item: Have everyone add their details on the OceanGliders repo

Eleanor: Don't like email, lets get together on UG2 slack. They pay for pro now so it's ok

Ilker: You have software for the flight model, if that can accept the new netcdf file. Identify missing parameters that are needed in the format
Need e.g. UG control from seaglider

Bastien: sal, temp pressure, lon, lat, ballast, pitch, profile number, mass. Will try to make this tool avaiable by end of summer

Eleanor: Make timeseries available. start with one per region

Anthony: Keep the data in timeseries format

Felix: Clean your data for e.g. thermal lag first

- [ ] Action Item: Callum to do github training for anyone who wants it

- [ ] Action item: Centalise everything on the vertical velocites SOP, all the processing code etc.

- [ ] Action items: Host the datasets and ensure that they have the right variables
There are issues with pyglider on how it handles timestamps and profiles

callum to send round email to everyone and do an invite to github training